PRDCP v2 Debug Report
Cycle: 035
Title: Research Source Identity Canonicalization and One-Shot Adapter Repair
Date: 2026-08-18 JST
Workflow: 35fc624a-d8ac-451b-97f6-f3e94e13a951
Status: REAL ADAPTER REPAIR 1/1 STOPPED SAFELY AT REDUNDANT COMPOSITE IDENTITY; CONTINUED IN CYCLE 036

1. What happened

Cycle 034 deterministically restored relevant_excerpt from the saved Retrieval Context
and invoked exactly one newly authorized Gemini Structured Reasoning task. That repair
passed the excerpt contract and exposed the next output-contract failure:

OUTPUT_CONTRACT_ERROR: ungrounded source identity metadata for
source_008333aebcd976549e1a618a: Japan, 内閣府知的財産戦略推進事務局

The consumed task identity was:

task_1abf9d163f0f4c20980e4221ca960e1e_runtime_model_output_repair_1

The correlated ERROR PMP message was 370b61f9-de3f-416a-b505-555609fc78b3, with parent
adbeb110-d72b-43de-ad56-31427357300f. Its Provider reservation binds the task to
google/gemini-3.7-flash. The one-shot runtime-output authorization
68bad3e9-26d5-40a3-8e0b-23c63c57300c is CONSUMED and is not reopened.

No Retrieval call, untouched specialist call or Quality Review call followed that
failure. The workflow remained FAILED at the exact saved checkpoint.

2. Root cause

The persisted PDF text contains the organization name with extraction/layout whitespace:

内閣府知的財産戦略推 進事務局

Gemini returned the same organization name without the layout space. The prior validator
used near-literal substring matching, so a typographically equivalent identity was
rejected. The returned country, Japan, is also deterministically supported by the saved
.go.jp URL even though the English country name need not occur literally in Japanese PDF
text.

The same validator also treated study_type, article_type, statement_type and
organization_type as if they were quoted identity strings. Those fields are analytical
classifications. Requiring each classification value to appear verbatim in source text
confused evidence grounding with classification and could reject valid responses from
all seven Researcher specialists.

The validator was therefore too strict in the wrong dimension. Relaxing all identity
validation would weaken traceability, while requiring byte-identical PDF text would make
valid grounding dependent on extraction artifacts.

3. Why Mock and Doctor did not detect it

Mock fixtures used identity values already present as exact substrings in synthetic
Retrieval content. They did not inject Unicode normalization, PDF layout whitespace or a
country inferred from a persisted government-domain URL. They also did not distinguish
identity names from analytical source classifications.

Doctor correctly checks runtime configuration, RD loading, model capabilities and
Retrieval readiness. It cannot establish semantic grounding for a future response. This
failure belonged in the deterministic Researcher output adapter and its Fault Injection
tests.

4. Repair design

The shared ResearcherAgent boundary now separates three concepts.

First, true identity names remain evidence-bound. Expert names and affiliations, academic
journal names, government organizations, news media names, public-opinion platforms,
politician names and industry organization names must be supported by the saved source.
Their comparison uses Unicode NFKC normalization, case folding and removal of whitespace
and punctuation while preserving alphanumeric content. This accepts PDF layout artifacts
without accepting an unrelated name.

Second, government country metadata is grounded either by normalized saved source text or
by a deterministic country-code domain mapping from the persisted URL. The current
closed mapping covers .jp, .eu, .gov, .gov.uk, .de, .fr, .ca and .au. A mismatched country
such as France for a .go.jp source remains rejected.

Third, analytical classification fields remain required and retain their Pydantic type
validation, but are no longer forced to appear as literal quotations in source text.
This preserves their meaning instead of weakening or silently deleting them.

All seven Researcher specialists use this one shared adapter. Producer General Opinion
has a separate SupportingSource contract and is not changed. Deliberation, Conclusion and
Playwright do not emit ResearchSource identity metadata and are unaffected.

5. Recovery identity and billing safety

A new explicit command was added:

py main.py --researcher-runtime-adapter-repair WORKFLOW_ID --provider openrouter --safe-mode

It creates exactly one new task identity:

<original_task_id>_runtime_adapter_repair_1

Authorization requires the consumed Cycle 034 runtime-output authorization, its exact
Provider reservation and model, the correlated source-identity ERROR PMP, and the same
saved Retrieval Context ID and SHA-256. A different error class, changed Context hash,
missing predecessor reservation or previously consumed adapter authorization blocks
before any Provider call.

The new authorization is consumed after its distinct Provider reservation is durably
written and before invocation. A failed or ambiguous call therefore cannot be repeated.
On success, the existing Cycle 032 recovery state machine reuses every saved Retrieval
Context, runs only the eight untouched Structured Reasoning tasks, integrates the report
and performs one Researcher Quality Review.

The Cycle 034 Real attempt used one of the nine additionally authorized reasoning calls.
Eight calls remained under that authorization, but a complete safe continuation requires
nine calls: one adapter repair plus eight untouched tasks. The system deliberately did
not make an incomplete eight-call continuation. A fresh explicit maximum of nine
reasoning calls is required.

6. Regression and Fault Injection

PASS  PDF layout whitespace and Unicode-normalized government organization are accepted
PASS  Japan is grounded by the immutable saved .go.jp URL
PASS  France is rejected for the same .go.jp source
PASS  Analytical classifications are excluded from quotation-style identity grounding
PASS  One adapter-repair identity is used with zero Retrieval calls
PASS  A consumed failed adapter repair cannot invoke the Provider again
PASS  Changed Retrieval hash blocks before reservation or Provider invocation
PASS  Existing Cycle 030/032/033/034 recovery boundaries remain intact
PASS  CLI parser exposes the explicit adapter-repair operation

The complete verification result was:

* maintained runtime compilation: PASS
* full unit/integration suite: 482/482 PASS
* 31 Role Definitions loaded in STRICT mode: PASS
* 22 OpenRouter Structured Output schema roots recursively validated: PASS
* Doctor mock readiness: READY, fail=0
* five-layer Mock CLI E2E through Playwright: COMPLETED

7. Exact production-clone recovery

The current production workflow was copied to isolated temporary storage and exercised
with the verified Cycle 035 code. The source production directory was hashed before and
after the test.

* initial Researcher status: FAILED
* final Researcher status: COMPLETED
* Retrieval calls: 0
* Gemini Structured Reasoning calls: 9
* Quality Review calls: 1
* runtime-adapter repair authorizations: 1
* total runtime-model repair authorizations: 9
* duplicate logical Provider calls: 0
* production source state/messages changed: NO

This proves that the failed first specialist receives one new auditable repair identity,
the remaining eight tasks execute once, and existing Retrieval, Topic Scout, Topic
Selector and completed Producer artifacts are reused.

Deployment verification repeated the same clone with the deployed production code and
obtained the same call counts and COMPLETED result. CLI help exposes
--researcher-runtime-adapter-repair. A read-only status load still reports Producer
COMPLETED and Researcher FAILED at the expected saved error. The state, messages and
outbox hashes and every Context/reservation/authorization count listed below remained
exactly unchanged.

8. Production workflow boundary after the Cycle 034 Real failure

The following values were fixed before Cycle 035 deployment verification:

* state SHA-256: 8DF7BC20A032DC14AADD3A0B04E739B3732AE285B538CE6763F76999E9836003
* messages SHA-256: ADD5479148EBF7B5D7A87E584B042280C857C85985BD93B55E337505F2BF74E6
* outbox SHA-256: C3E3ACBBD813327B33A8D8327695CC24415BDFE820029BC27EBC194F654B6CCE
* saved Retrieval Context files: 10
* saved Retrieval reservations: 10
* Provider reservations: 18
* runtime-repair authorizations: 1
* runtime-output authorizations: 1
* runtime-adapter authorizations: 0

All implementation and verification in this cycle used staging or isolated clone
storage. Existing production workflow JSON, messages, reservations, Contexts,
authorizations and outbox were not deleted, reset or rewritten.

9. Provider call and cost accounting

Real call that exposed Cycle 035:

* Retrieval: 0
* Gemini Structured Reasoning: 1
* Quality Review: 0
* automatic retries: 0

Cycle 035 implementation and verification:

* Retrieval: 0
* Gemini Structured Reasoning: 1
* Quality Review: 0

Exact OpenRouter cost was not persisted by the runtime and must be read from the
operator's account. Compilation, tests, Doctor, Mock E2E and production-clone recovery
were non-billable.

10. State, PMP, Schema, Checkpoint, Reservation and Outbox impact

The repair changes only deterministic post-response validation and a suffix-specific,
chained one-shot authorization path. It does not alter PMP storage formats, strict output
schemas, existing checkpoints, Retrieval Context content, ordinary retry semantics or
outbox delivery rules.

On a newly authorized Real continuation, expected writes are limited to the new adapter
authorization/reservation and correlated RESULT or ERROR; then up to eight existing
runtime-model repair authorization/reservation/result groups; then normal integrated
Research Report, Quality Review state and Researcher outbox if successful. Existing
records are append-only or normally transitioned; no historical file is migrated.

11. Real continuation result

After a fresh explicit authorization, production invoked exactly one runtime-adapter
repair task and stopped on:

OUTPUT_CONTRACT_ERROR: ungrounded source identity metadata for
source_008333aebcd976549e1a618a: 内閣官房 / 内閣府知的財産戦略推進事務局

The second component is grounded in saved PDF text after Cycle 035 normalization. The
first component is the organization represented by the immutable saved cas.go.jp URL.
The remaining problem was a redundant Provider-generated author_or_organization alias:
the same typed organization identity was generated independently in multiple fields and
the combined spelling was then checked as one literal source substring. No Retrieval,
remaining reasoning or Quality Review call occurred. The consumed adapter identity is not
reused. Cycle 036 removes those redundant fields from the Provider schema and hydrates
them from the one validated type-specific identity.

12. Debug Cycle self-audit

Root cause identified: YES
Symptom-only patch avoided: YES
Same Failure Mode audited across all 7 Researcher specialists: YES
Producer General Opinion boundary checked separately: YES
Other layers and common reservation pipeline checked: YES
State/PMP/Schema/Checkpoint/Reservation/Context/Outbox impact checked: YES
Regression tests added: YES
Recovery and fault conditions verified: YES
Production clone verified: YES
Debug Report generated: YES
Design meaning explained: YES
Unnecessary Provider calls: NO; Cycle 035 Real calls were limited to 1
Safety mechanisms disabled: NO

Cycle 035 completed its bounded Real attempt and handed the next proven contract failure
to Cycle 036.
